Module lifecycle note (#1964)
google/flax: docs/design_notes/module_lifecycle.md

> # The Module Lifecycle

Reviewer: Suggestion: Use sentence case

```suggestion
# The Module lifecycle
```

Reviewer: The only reason IMO we should use sentence case, is because when you have Flax names that use common English names—such as `Module`—titles may not make it obvious to users.

So, here:

```suggestion
# The Module lifecycle
```

it's more apparent that `Module` is a name, and not just a word, such as "lifecycle". If @jheek introduces a class called `Lifecycle`, this title may get confusing (e.g. when users start searching for `Lifecycle` on Flax docs/search engines)

Reference: https://developers.google.com/style/capitalization?hl=en#capitalization-in-titles-and-headings

Author: I agree it creates some ambiguity between class names and normal "words"

> This design note is intended for people who are somewhat familiar with Modules but want to understand more about the design principles behind the abstraction. After reading this, you should have a solid understanding of the assumptions and guarantees the Module API is built upon. If you have no practical experience with Modules yet, Please take a look at the [MNIST tutorial](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/annotated_mnist.html).

Reviewer: Nit: suggestion (more accessibility-friendly language) + capitalization

```
If you have no practical experience with Modules yet, check out the [MNIST tutorial](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/annotated_mnist.html).
```

```suggestion
This design note is intended for people who are somewhat familiar with Modules but want to understand more about the design principles behind the abstraction. After reading this, you should have a solid understanding of the assumptions and guarantees the Module API is built upon. If you have no practical experience with Modules yet, check out the [MNIST tutorial](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/annotated_mnist.html).
```

> This design note is intended for people who are somewhat familiar with Modules but want to understand more about the design principles behind the abstraction. After reading this, you should have a solid understanding of the assumptions and guarantees the Module API is built upon. If you have no practical experience with Modules yet, Please take a look at the [MNIST tutorial](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/annotated_mnist.html).

Reviewer: More suggestions:

```suggestion
This design note is intended for users who are already familiar with Flax Modules and want to understand the design principles behind the abstraction. This note should give you a strong understanding of the assumptions and guarantees the Module API is built upon. If you have no practical experience with Modules, check out the [MNIST tutorial](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/annotated_mnist.html) to get started.
```

Note: https://developers.google.com/style/translation?hl=en#be-inclusive (writing for a global audience)

Author: I think it applies for example to the line below: "off the beaten track". The link is interesting but also makes things more complicated :) One thing I observed is that many communities have moved to a much more engaged/personal/funny way of writing docs rather than the dry reference material that was common before. Yet what is funny for one person is confusing to another. And what is boring for some people is clear and to the point for others.

Reviewer: @marcvanzee I think it's things like "colloquialisms, idioms, or slang" or things that may come across as such to users who aren't as proficient in English/"computer science" English (https://developers.google.com/style/translation)

@jheek Yup, it's not easy to balance

> This design note is intended for people who are somewhat familiar with Modules but want to understand more about the design principles behind the abstraction. After reading this, you should have a solid understanding of the assumptions and guarantees the Module API is built upon. If you have no practical experience with Modules yet, Please take a look at the [MNIST tutorial](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/annotated_mnist.html).

Reviewer 2: What about linking `Module` to `linen.Module` ?
(First, it's nice to have a code link ready when reading the tutorial, second I like having pages that anybody can land on and understand what is meant)

Author: done

> Modules are the core of Flax. This is a practical guide to the design and behavior of the `Module` class. By the end, you should feel comfortable to go off the beaten track and use Modules in new ways.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

```suggestion
Modules are at the core of Flax. This note is a practical guide about the design and behavior of the `Module` class. After studying this note, you should feel more comfortable with Modules and use them in custom ways suited for your tasks.
```

Note: https://developers.google.com/style/translation?hl=en#be-inclusive (writing for a global audience)

> Modules are the core of Flax. This is a practical guide to the design and behavior of the `Module` class. By the end, you should feel comfortable to go off the beaten track and use Modules in new ways.

Reviewer 2: Don't we have `flax.core` that has precisely nothing to do with Modules? Or is this an intended pun?

More generally, I think might be interesting to say in the beginning of this doc that this is about `Linen Modules` which are one (opinionated) way of how the underlying functional core can be used in Flax to write compact modules with some nice features.

Author: rephrased

## Overview

### Definition

> Let’s start with a high-level overview of the Module lifecycle. We start by defining a simple Module:

Reviewer: +1 @marcvanzee

> Let’s start with a high-level overview of the Module lifecycle. We start by defining a simple Module:

Author: Why is that relevant to the lifecycle? Note that the doc is expliclty a follow up after learning the APIs so users should already now compact

> Let’s start with a high-level overview of the Module lifecycle. We start by defining a simple Module:

Reviewer 3: I was just thinking to say something like: "(note we will discuss [compact modules](link-to-compact-modules) below)", just to guide the reader, but if was just a minor thing so if you think it isn't necessary feel free to leave it out.

> Let’s start with a high-level overview of the Module lifecycle. We start by defining a simple Module:

Author: The compact chapter is a bit of a de-tour already. I'm trying to minimize it's impact on the overall narrative. It seems to cause plenty of distraction already :)

> ```python

Author: rewrote to rst syntax

class MLP(nn.Module):
  # 1. Attribute annotations
  hidden_size: int
  out_size: int

  # 2. The `setup` method
  def setup(self):
    self.hidden = nn.Dense(self.hidden_size)
    self.out = nn.Dense(self.out_size)

  # 3. User methods  
  def __call__(self, x):
    a = self.hidden(x)
    h = nn.relu(a)
    return self.out(h)
```

This Module consists of:

> 1. **_Attribute annotations_**, defined as [dataclass](https://docs.python.org/3/library/dataclasses.html) fields. These annotations automatically define a constructor.

Reviewer 2: It's mysterious to me why this one is in italics but not the others...

It looks a bit uneven in the numbered list (but maybe there's a good reason making up for that)

Similarly, consider using the same pattern (i.e. with comma, or with period) for all three points.

Author: Yeah this is strange, It is fixed now

> 2. **The `setup` method,** that creates submodules and assigns them to attributes.

Reviewer: +1 @marcvanzee

> 2. **The `setup` method,** that creates submodules and assigns them to attributes.

Author: the clause isn't non-essential because here you are giving a definition.

> 3. A **user-defined method**. By convention, most Modules have just one  `__call__` method, but you can define multiple methods or use different method names.

Reviewer 2: Still nit-ting here, but why don't we use the same `3. User methods` as in the code above to keep things in parallel?

Author: done

### Construction/initialization

Now we want to construct and use the `MLP` Module:

```python

> mlp = MLP(5, 3)

Reviewer 2: In terms of style, should we encourage passing the arguments as keywords here?

Author: done

variables = mlp.init(random.PRNGKey(0), x)
y = mlp.apply(variables, x)
```

> First, we construct an instance of `MLP` and pass the construction attributes. Note that construction here is different from what you might expect if you are not used to Functional Programming patterns. The `MLP` constructor does not actually create variables or any internal state whatsoever. It’s best to think of it as a specification or template of the Module that contains functionality but no data.

Author: > In most imperative language is it expected that the constructor does not "do" much

I'm not saying that imperative languages do a lot of work in the constructor but that the constructor creates internal state. I think how much work is done is not what really matters for example pytorch inits the params in the constructor but they could also create an "empty" param and have a seperate init routine so the constructor does less work. But at the end of the day you are creating a stateful object by calling the Module constructor whether it is empty or not.

Let’s first take a closer look at initialization. Surprisingly, there actually is no special initialization path in Flax. Calling `init` is just a special case of `apply` and we could also code it as:

```python
# equivalent to: variables = mlp.init(random.PRNGKey(0), x)
_, variables = mlp.apply({}, x, rngs={"params": random.PRNGKey(0)}, mutable=True)
```

Thus, `init` is nothing more than a special case of `apply` where:

> 1. We call a module without any initial variables (an empty dict)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. We call a module without any initial variables (an empty dict).
```

Reviewer: Would this be even more applicable here @marcvanzee @jheek 

```suggestion
1. Call a Module without any initial variables (an empty dict).
```

(capitalization)

> 2. A PRNG generator named “params” is always passed for randomly initializing parameters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. A PRNG generator named `params` is always passed for randomly initializing parameters (using the parameter initialization functions).
```

Reviewer: +1

> 3. All variable collections are set to mutable (`mutable=True`). When a collection is mutable, existing variables can be updated and new variables can be created.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. All variable collections are set to mutable (`mutable=True`). When a collection is mutable, existing variables can be updated and new variables can be created. In this case, this is necessary because `init` will initialize all parameters which are added to the returned variable dictionary.
```

### Lifecycle

> Thus, what remains is to actually understand what `.apply(...)` does. All the interesting stuff in a Module happens inside the `apply` method. We will refer to the various stages before and during `apply` as the “Module lifecycle”. We can summarize this lifecycle in a number of steps:

Reviewer 3: It is a bit odd to start a new section with "Thus". Maybe like this?

```suggestion
Now that we understand `init` is just a special case of `apply`, let's analyze what `.apply(...)` does in more detail. In fact, most of the complexity of Modules resides inside the `apply` method. We will refer to the various stages before and during `apply` as the "Module lifecycle". We can summarize this lifecycle in a number of steps:
```

> 1. We construct `mlp = MLP(5, 3)`, such that `mlp.hidden_size=5` and `mlp_out_size=3`

Reviewer 3: This is not really part of the `apply` function right? It seels like 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 below are actually the `apply` lifecycle.

> 1. We construct `mlp = MLP(5, 3)`, such that `mlp.hidden_size=5` and `mlp_out_size=3`

Reviewer 2: `mlp.out_size=3`

> 2. Then, `mlp.apply`:

Reviewer: WDYT @jheek @marcvanzee @saeta @andsteing @gnecula 

```suggestion
2. Then, call `mlp.apply` which performs the following:
```

Author: looks better

>     1. Makes a clone of `mlp`, let’s call it `mlp_copy`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    1. Makes a clone of `mlp`, let’s call it `mlp_copy`.
```

    2. Calls `mlp_copy.setup()`.

>     3. Returns the output of `mlp_copy.__call__()` and optionally the variable collections that were specified as mutable using `mutable=` kwarg.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    3. Returns the output of `mlp_copy.__call__()` and optionally the variable collections that were specified as mutable using the keyword argument `mutable=`.
```

> You might be surprised that the lifecycle includes cloning the Module instance. This will be explained later in the **Top-level Modules** section.

Reviewer 3: I think you should provide at least a hint here why we do the clone to help the reader somewhat.

```suggestion
You might be surprised that the lifecycle includes cloning the Module instance. In short, this is done to ensure that `apply` can be treated as a pure function (i.e., if you pass the same arguments in, it will return the same outputs). This will be explained in more detail later in the **Top-level Modules** section.
```

Author: fair point

> You might be surprised that the lifecycle includes cloning the Module instance. This will be explained later in the **Top-level Modules** section.

Reviewer 3: I think you can add links to subsections as well, so maybe do that for "Top-level Modules"

> You might be surprised that the lifecycle includes cloning the Module instance. This will be explained later in the **Top-level Modules** section.

Reviewer 2: Make it a link instead of bold face?
(here and also below where you use document-internal links)

Author: done

> ### Variables

Reviewer 3: Consider linking to the documentation of Linen's Variables as well: https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/flax.linen.html#module-flax.core.variables

> The word “variable” is ubiquitous in programming and math. However, it’s important to have a good understanding of what that means in the context of JAX and Flax. Inside Flax modules, variables act like you expect from Python. They are initialized once, read, and perhaps even updated every so often. However, JAX has no concept of variables. Instead, values are stored in arrays similar to NumPy arrays  -- with one important difference: they are immutable.

Reviewer 2: nit: maybe use "–" instead of "--"

> `init` and `apply` return the variables as a dictionary of ordinary JAX arrays. They are immutable and therefore really just a snapshot of the variables. Next time we call apply we can feed back the snapshot so the variables are again in the same state as where we finished on the last call to apply.

Reviewer 3: > `init` and `apply` return the variables as a dictionary of ordinary JAX arrays.

Dictionaries with string keys and JAX arrays in the leafs, right?

Reviewer 2: "nested dictionaries" might also clarify this; maybe even mention what the structure corresponds to?

> `init` and `apply` return the variables as a dictionary of ordinary JAX arrays. They are immutable and therefore really just a snapshot of the variables. Next time we call apply we can feed back the snapshot so the variables are again in the same state as where we finished on the last call to apply.

Reviewer 3: I don't really get the "Next time" sentence. what does feeding back the snapshot mean?

Author: clarified

> `init` and `apply` return the variables as a dictionary of ordinary JAX arrays. They are immutable and therefore really just a snapshot of the variables. Next time we call apply we can feed back the snapshot so the variables are again in the same state as where we finished on the last call to apply.

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
Methods `init` and `apply` return the variables as a dictionary of ordinary JAX arrays. They are immutable and, therefore, really are just a snapshot of the variables. Next time we call `apply`, we can feed the snapshot back, so the variables are again in the same state as where we finished on the last `apply` call.
```

or something along these lines. LMKWYT @jheek @avital @marcvanzee

> **NOTE** \
Module fields are declared using the `field_name: TypeHint` syntax (same as dataclasses). Without a type hint, an attribute is considered a static property of the class. In case you cannot specify the type you can use `typing.Any` as a wildcard type.

> ## Compact Modules

Reviewer 3: Consider linking to this design note somewhere: https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/design_notes/setup_or_nncompact.html

Reviewer 2: (and linking from there to this new document)

> Linen provides an alternative API for defining modules more compactly. This is especially useful for the common case where the Module consists of only one method that uses parameters and/or sub-modules. Using the compact API the MLP can be rewritten as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flax Linen provides an alternative API for defining modules more compactly. This is especially useful for the common case where the Module consists of only one method that uses parameters and/or sub-modules. Using the `compact` API the MLP can be rewritten as follows:
```

(for more clarity e.g. for new users)

Author: Note that users should already now the linen API (including compact) when reading this doc

```python
class CompactMLP(nn.Module):
  hidden_size: int
  out_size: int

  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, x):
    a = nn.Dense(self.hidden_size)(x)
    h = nn.relu(a)
    return nn.Dense(self.out_size)(h)

```

> A compact `Module` is similar in spirit to a function. It offers a concise notation and restricts external interaction to the inputs and return values of the function. In this case the concise notation might make it easier for others to understand what the Module is doing. There is no need to jump back and forth between the setup and call function to understand what the submodules are doing. Instead, simply reading the call method from top to bottom once should give a clear picture of what the Module is doing. This can make a significant difference if you are implementing complex Modules with many hyper parameters.

Reviewer: Nit: LMKWYT

```suggestion
A compact `Module` is similar in spirit to a function. It offers a concise notation and restricts external interaction to the inputs and return values of the function. In this case the concise notation might make it easier for others to understand what the Module is doing. There is no need to jump back and forth between the `setup` and `call` methods to understand what the submodules are doing. Instead, simply reading the `call` method from top to bottom once should provide a clear picture of what the Module is doing. This can make a significant difference if you are implementing complex Modules with many hyperparameters.
```

> A compact `Module` is similar in spirit to a function. It offers a concise notation and restricts external interaction to the inputs and return values of the function. In this case the concise notation might make it easier for others to understand what the Module is doing. There is no need to jump back and forth between the setup and call function to understand what the submodules are doing. Instead, simply reading the call method from top to bottom once should give a clear picture of what the Module is doing. This can make a significant difference if you are implementing complex Modules with many hyper parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `compact` `Module` is similar in spirit to a function. It offers a concise notation and restricts external interaction to the inputs and return values of the function. In this case the concise notation might make it easier for others to understand what the Module is doing. There is no need to jump back and forth between the setup and call function to understand what the submodules are doing. Instead, simply reading the call method from top to bottom once should give a clear picture of what the Module is doing. This can make a significant difference if you are implementing complex Modules with many hyper parameters.
```

Note that "compact", like "Module", are common English words, so using backticks here and there may help users understand the context better.

> A compact `Module` is similar in spirit to a function. It offers a concise notation and restricts external interaction to the inputs and return values of the function. In this case the concise notation might make it easier for others to understand what the Module is doing. There is no need to jump back and forth between the setup and call function to understand what the submodules are doing. Instead, simply reading the call method from top to bottom once should give a clear picture of what the Module is doing. This can make a significant difference if you are implementing complex Modules with many hyper parameters.

Reviewer 2: nit: this paragraph uses "doing" three times, which feels like a lot

> Another benefit of defining submodules and/or variables inline is that you can use arguments to your method when constructing variables. The most common example of this is using shape information to determine the shape of a parameter like this:

Reviewer: Suggestion: do you mean "use arguments **in** your method" or "**add** arguments to your method..."?

e.g.

```suggestion
Another benefit of defining submodules and/or variables inline is that you can add arguments to your method when constructing variables. The most common example of this is using shape information to determine the shape of a parameter like this:
```

```python
class CompactScaledMLP(nn.Module):
  hidden_size: int
  out_size: int

  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, x):
    scale = self.param("scale", x.shape[-1:], nn.initializers.ones)
    x *= scale
    a = nn.Dense(self.hidden_size)(x)
    h = nn.relu(a)
    return nn.Dense(self.out_size)(h)
```

> Many of the standard linen layers like `nn.Dense` use this type of shape inference already to avoid the need to specify input shapes (like the number of input features to a Dense layer).

Reviewer 3: Maybe also explain this isn't always possible and why (otherwise: why would we have a `setup` method at all?) I think our `Embed` layer uses setup so you can consider given that as an example.

Author: I think this is best covered in the setup vs compact note?

### Compact control flow

> The order in which you define submodules determines the name of a submodule if none is provided explicitly (using the name= construction argument). Because the name determines how parameters are mapped to submodules, you must be careful about mixing control flow with auto-generated names. Using control flow can change the order or remove certain submodules altogether. This is useful in the case where certain submodules should only exist depending on some construction argument. However, when control flow depends on the input arguments to the Module you should be careful. For example the following Module will break:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The order in which you define submodules determines the name of a submodule if none is provided explicitly (using the `name=` keyword argument pass to the module's constructor). Because the name determines how parameters are mapped to submodules, you must be careful about mixing control flow with auto-generated names. Using control flow can change the order or remove certain submodules altogether. This is useful in the case where certain submodules should only exist depending on some construction argument. However, when control flow depends on the input arguments to the Module you should be careful. For example the following Module will break:
```

Reviewer: @marcvanzee your version + some formatting

```suggestion
The order in which you define submodules determines the name of a submodule if `none` is provided explicitly (using the `name=` keyword argument pass to the module's constructor). Because the `name` determines how parameters are mapped to submodules, you must be careful about mixing control flow with auto-generated names. Using control flow can change the order or remove certain submodules altogether. This is useful in cases where certain submodules should only exist depending on some construction argument. However, when control flow depends on the input arguments to the Module, you should be careful. For example, the following Module will break:
```

> The order in which you define submodules determines the name of a submodule if none is provided explicitly (using the name= construction argument). Because the name determines how parameters are mapped to submodules, you must be careful about mixing control flow with auto-generated names. Using control flow can change the order or remove certain submodules altogether. This is useful in the case where certain submodules should only exist depending on some construction argument. However, when control flow depends on the input arguments to the Module you should be careful. For example the following Module will break:

Reviewer 3: > For example the following Module will break

Why does it break? What happens when you use it?

Author: added clarification

```python
class WrongModule(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, x, mode):
    if mode == "encode"
      return nn.Dense(8)(x)
    elif mode == "decode":
      return nn.Dense(4)(x)
```

> This problem can be solved in various ways: Provide explicit names, create the modules in setup, or move the constructor out of the control flow. The latter is done as follows:

Reviewer: Suggestion: use a list + formatting

```suggestion
This problem can be solved in various ways:
- Provide explicit names
- Ceate the modules in `setup`, or
- Move the constructor out of the control flow.

The latter is done as follows:
```

Author: agreed

```python
class CorrectModule(nn.Module):
  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, x, mode):
    encoder = nn.Dense(8)
    decoder = nn.Dense(4)
    if mode == "encode"
      return encoder(x)
    elif mode == "decode":
      return decoder(x)
```

In the above example the construction order is fixed. After construction the submodules can be used in an arbitrary order.

> > Note \

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> **NOTE** \
```

> compact modules show a strong resemblance to [React hooks](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-custom.html)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
compact modules show a strong resemblance to [React hooks](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-custom.html).
```

> ## Top-level Modules

Reviewer 2: Should the main title here be "top-level modules"? Or rather something along the lines "Bound/unbound modules" ?

I think about "Flax code" (i.e. code inside modules) to always run in a "bound" state. It cannot be called "from normal Python code" because the top-level modules are in an "unbound" state. So one needs to call the bridging init/apply functions that will call the code inside the module in a "bound" state.

It's an interesting fact that "top-level modules" can never be in a bound state, but rather are cloned on-the-fly and the original copy (instance) remains unbound all the time ... But it feels not like the most important part of this story

Author: > I think about "Flax code" (i.e. code inside modules) to always run in a "bound" state.

This inside / outside Module code is exactly the intuition I'm trying to cultivate here. bound/unbound is the jargon top-level vs inside Module is the practical distinction. I would prefer to keep it intuitive.

Reviewer 2: ok then I think I need to update my thinking here :)

> When a Module instance is created at the top-level it will be in an "unbound" state, meaning it has no variables attached. By top-level we mean it is not constructed as a sub-Module inside another Module class. Apart from calling `init` and `apply` there is not much you can do with an unbound Module. Note also that `setup` is not called on unbound Modules so you can really only access the construction arguments. See the Future work section for how this might change in the future.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a Module instance is created at the top level it will be in an "unbound" state, meaning it has no variables attached. By top-level we mean it is not constructed as a sub-Module inside another Module class. Apart from calling `init` and `apply` there is not much you can do with an unbound Module. Note also that `setup` is not called on unbound Modules so you can really only access the construction arguments. See the Future work section for how this might change in the future.
```

Reviewer: A modification of @marcvanzee 's suggestion with some formatting:

```suggestion
When a Module instance is created at the "top-level", it will be in an "unbound" state—that is, it has no variables attached. "Top-level" means it is not constructed as a sub-Module inside another Module class. Apart from calling `init` and `apply`, there is not much you can do with an unbound Module. Note also that `setup` is not called on unbound Modules, so you can really only access the construction arguments. Refer to the **Future work** section to learn how this might change in the future.
```

NOTE: "sub-Module" or "submodule" - should pick one for consistency across all docs IMO @jheek @marcvanzee @avital

> When a Module instance is created at the top-level it will be in an "unbound" state, meaning it has no variables attached. By top-level we mean it is not constructed as a sub-Module inside another Module class. Apart from calling `init` and `apply` there is not much you can do with an unbound Module. Note also that `setup` is not called on unbound Modules so you can really only access the construction arguments. See the Future work section for how this might change in the future.

Reviewer 3: > Note also that `setup` is not called on unbound Modules

I don't get this, when it is not called? Do you mean it is not called when you construct it?

> When a Module instance is created at the top-level it will be in an "unbound" state, meaning it has no variables attached. By top-level we mean it is not constructed as a sub-Module inside another Module class. Apart from calling `init` and `apply` there is not much you can do with an unbound Module. Note also that `setup` is not called on unbound Modules so you can really only access the construction arguments. See the Future work section for how this might change in the future.

Reviewer 2: "is not called" -> "has not been called" ?

(because when one calls `top_level_module.init()` then setup will be called)

Author: but it will be called on the clone...

### Why are top-level modules always unbound?

> When we call `apply`, a copy of the top-level Module is created which will actually hold the variables and PRNG sequences. This stateful, "bound", clone only exists while we are executing the apply method. The reason for this is that if you create a stateful object and destroy it before the apply function returns, the `apply` function itself behaves like a pure function (pure means if you put the same arguments in, it will return the same outputs).

Reviewer 2: This paragraph is not really clear to me. It seems to me that a function is pure when its outputs only depend on its inputs, regardless of whether you create stateful objects (and - or not - destroy them). So what's the motivation for the cloning exactly?
(An example might help)

Author: adding some clarification

Reviewer 2: ... but the function would still be pure if it returned the stateful object, no? if true, then the requirement of wanting to have a pure function would not necessitate you to destroy the bound module inside the function ...

Author: Here you get towards the problem of referential transparency. JAX expects a PyTree (freely cloneable because it doesn't have identity) object as output to a function. Cloning a stateful object is itself a side effect because the clone has it's own state. This is also why using dicts and lists with as Pytrees can lead to weird behavior (because they are actually stateful). For example if you have a function like this:

```python
def add_metrics(metrics, loss):
  metrics["loss"] = loss
  return metrics
```
The behavior will change if you add @jit to this function because the metrics dict will no longer be shared.
I try to avoid using referential transparency though as people find it very confusing. So I think it's a good to encourage pure function with immutable inputs/outputs. And anything else is "outside warranty" :)

> Pure functions have many advantages but when using JAX they are often essential. For example, most code requires compilation using `jax.jit` to be fast and once you created a Module you probably want to optimize its parameters using `jax.grad`. However, these APIs expect a pure function and don't work on stateful bound `Module` instances directly. Moreover, pure functions allow for flexible interoperability with other libraries.

Reviewer 3: > Moreover, pure functions allow for flexible interoperability with other libraries.

Can you give an example? Maybe mention Optax?

Author: done

### Cloning

> To make this approach work reliably we need well-defined cloning behavior. Rather than relying on a complex nested cloning procedure like Python's `deepcopy`, Flax enforces that a `Module` is exactly defined by its construction arguments. Therefore cloning a Module reduces to calling the constructor with its original construction arguments. Because `Module` acts as an immutable dataclass, the construction arguments are mapped 1:1 to instance attributes.

Reviewer 2: what about post init & computed fields ?

Author: added

### Bind

> Sometimes it's useful to have a bound, top-level Module without having to wrap the code in a function. For example: to interact with a Module inside a Jupyter notebook. The [bind](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/flax.linen.html?highlight=bind#flax.linen.Module.bind) method returns a bound clone with an unlimited lifetime. The downside of this is that you cannot combine it with JAX transformations or integrate it into a vanilla JAX codebase that expects stateless code.

Reviewer 2: An example highlighting what can go wrong would help here.

## Setup

The `setup` method is often used like the constructor hook (`__init__`) in normal Python classes. However, for more advanced use cases it’s good to realize that it is not quite the same as a constructor.

> `setup` is only called after a Module becomes bound. Normally, this is not an issue because most Modules are bound (almost) immediately (as part of `init` and `apply`). Inside `setup`, sub-modules become bound when they are assigned to an attribute. nside an `nn.compact` decorated method, sub-modules are bound immediately when constructed. As explained in the previous section, top-level Modules are never bound and thus setup is not called when they are constructed. This means that you cannot access attributes assigned in setup from an unbound, top-level module.

Reviewer: Nit: "nside" -> "Inside"

```suggestion
`setup` is only called after a Module becomes bound. Normally, this is not an issue because most Modules are bound (almost) immediately (as part of `init` and `apply`). Inside `setup`, sub-modules become bound when they are assigned to an attribute. Inside an `nn.compact` decorated method, sub-modules are bound immediately when constructed. As explained in the previous section, top-level Modules are never bound and thus setup is not called when they are constructed. This means that you cannot access attributes assigned in setup from an unbound, top-level module.
```

> `setup` is only called after a Module becomes bound. Normally, this is not an issue because most Modules are bound (almost) immediately (as part of `init` and `apply`). Inside `setup`, sub-modules become bound when they are assigned to an attribute. nside an `nn.compact` decorated method, sub-modules are bound immediately when constructed. As explained in the previous section, top-level Modules are never bound and thus setup is not called when they are constructed. This means that you cannot access attributes assigned in setup from an unbound, top-level module.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`setup` is only called after a Module becomes bound. Normally, this is not an issue because most Modules are bound (almost) immediately (as part of `init` and `apply`). Inside `setup`, sub-modules become bound when they are assigned to an attribute. Inside an `nn.compact` decorated method, sub-modules are bound immediately when constructed. As explained in the previous section, top-level Modules are never bound and thus setup is not called when they are constructed. This means that you cannot access attributes assigned in setup from an unbound, top-level module.
```

> `setup` is only called after a Module becomes bound. Normally, this is not an issue because most Modules are bound (almost) immediately (as part of `init` and `apply`). Inside `setup`, sub-modules become bound when they are assigned to an attribute. nside an `nn.compact` decorated method, sub-modules are bound immediately when constructed. As explained in the previous section, top-level Modules are never bound and thus setup is not called when they are constructed. This means that you cannot access attributes assigned in setup from an unbound, top-level module.

Reviewer 3: I feel this is really hard to grasp without an example, would it be possible to add a very simple one?

Author: added

The `setup` method is not called immediately after the `Module` becomes bound but only when you interact with the `Module` instance (e.g.: call a method or access an attribute). This should not impact the behavior of a `Module` but the lazy execution does sometimes affect log statements and stack traces during debugging. The section on functionalization will explain why we need `setup` to be lazy in the first place.

> # Functionalization

Reviewer 2: This whole section: should it really be part of this document, or is it maybe a better fit for the lifted transformations design note?

It seems not so much related to "Linen module lifecycle" to me, but rather about "pure functions that can directly be transformed vs. functions inside bound modules that must take extra care to transform state that is implicitly handled by Flax"

Author: I refer to the lifted note for details. The main point here is that lifting repeats the lifecycle and justifies some constraints further (like cloning)

> # Functionalization

Reviewer 2: This whole section: should it really be part of this document, or is it maybe a better fit for the lifted transformations design note?

It seems not so much related to "Linen module lifecycle" to me, but rather about "pure functions that can directly be transformed vs. functions inside bound modules that must take extra care to transform state that is implicitly handled by Flax"

Author: I do think this is part of the lifecycle because functionalization affects multiple design decisions (lazy setup, cloning, ...) and effectively inside a lifted transformation there is a mini/recurisve lifecycle.

But what if we want to use JAX transformations **inside** Modules? The answer to this is functionalization.

This procedure itself is tedious and error-prone but handled internally by Flax. At a high-level we can summarize it as follows. For a method `fn` defined within a Module:

1. Collect the state (variables & PRNG sequences) of the Module(s) that should be available inside the JAX transformation and take a snapshot of it.
2. Call the JAX transformation with the original arguments and the collected state. Then inside the transformation:
    1. Unpack the state and recreate the Modules
    2. Call the user code `fn`
    3. Collect the updated variables and rng and return it together with the original return values from `fn`
3. Update the original state with the updated state returned from the transformation.

> A more in depth explanation of functionalization and lifting can be found [here](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/design_notes/lift.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A more in depth explanation of functionalization and lifting can be found in the [Lifted Transformations](https://flax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/design_notes/lift.html) design note.
```

(This may be "better" than "here")

Reviewer 2: +1

also consider adding a link back to this document from that other guide

Reviewer 2: +1

also consider adding a link back to this document from that other guide

### Practical consequences

For the most part functionalization is something that is handled automatically for you. Still there are some constraints that you must take into account. Most importantly, Flax only handles the stateful primitives (Linen variables and RNGs) and not arbitrary stateful Python code. Most importantly: You cannot close over stateful objects and `Module` objects because they are invisible to Flax's internals (and to JAX in general).

```python
class Foo(nn.Module):

  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, x):
    dense = nn.Dense(x.shape[-1])
    return self.inner(x, lambda x: dense(x) + 1)
  

>   def inner(self, x, fn):

Reviewer 2: This code snippet (and the one below) are actually perfectly fine, as long as the method is not transformed.

Consider making this point a bit clearer by adding the transformation (maybe commented out), and making that point more explicitly in a comment or the main text.

Author: fixed

>   def inner(self, x, fn):

Reviewer 2: This code snippet (and the one below) are actually perfectly fine, as long as the method is not transformed.

Consider making this point a bit clearer by adding the transformation (maybe commented out), and making that point more explicitly in a comment or the main text.

Author: Done

    for i in range(3):
      x = fn(x)
    return x
```

Here `inner` takes a function that closes over a Module instance. In this example, that works fine because we are not transforming the inner method with a lifted transformation. Most methods are not transformed but it is good to know how to make Module methods transformable.

> The main obstacle for transformability are types that JAX does not recognize. By default JAX will recognize containers (lists, dictionaries, and tuples) of JAX/NumPy arrays and python scalars (bool, int, float, etc.). The containers are called [pytrees](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jax-101/05.1-pytrees.html) and the pytree API is extensible with custom types. With the flax.struct package you can also define pytree compatible dataclasses.

Reviewer 2: simpler might be something like "JAX only understands [Pytree](...) arguments. That's arbitrarily nested Python containers (dict, list, tuple) of (Jax) numpy ndarrays and Python numbers/bools. Flax allows to define dataclasses that ..."

nit: maybe link and format `flax.struct`

> Function closure is the most common way to accidentally hide a JAX array or linen Module from a transformation. There is however an easy workaround if you want to pass closures that are also compatible with JAX and Linen transformations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Function closure is the most common way to accidentally hide a JAX array or Flax Linen Module from a transformation. There is however an easy workaround if you want to pass closures that are also compatible with JAX and Linen transformations:
```

```python

> class Partial(flax.struct.PytreeNode):

Reviewer 2: `PyTreeNode`

  fn: Callable = flax.struct.field(pytree_node=False)
  args: Iterable[Any]

  def __call__(self, *args, **kwargs):
    return self.fn(*(tuple(self.args) + args), **kwargs)

class Foo(nn.Module):

  @nn.compact
  def __call__(self, x):
    dense = nn.Dense(x.shape[-1])

>     return self.inner(x, Partial(lambda mdl, x: mdl(x) + 1, dense)

Reviewer 2: should it be `[dense]` ?

also, it's missing a closing parens `)`

Author: fixed

  
  def inner(self, x, fn):
    ...
```

> Here the closure is implemented using a Flax dataclass. The function itself is annotated with `flax.struct.field(pytree_node=False)` to indicate that it does not contain Jax Arrays or linen Modules. The partially applied `args` on the other hand is treated as a pytree container. We rewrite the closure to use Partial. Now the inner method can be transformed using lifted transformations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here the closure is implemented using a Flax dataclass. The function itself is annotated with `flax.struct.field(pytree_node=False)` to indicate that it does not contain JAX Arrays or Flax Linen Modules. The partially applied `args` on the other hand is treated as a pytree container. We rewrite the closure to use Partial. Now the inner method can be transformed using lifted transformations.
```

## Future work

> ### Setup for unbound Modules

Reviewer 2: This section feels like it would be better a separate FLIP.

Not sure why this would be relevant to users reading about Linen module lifecycle. And publishing it as part of a design note will just archive the discussion, instead of discussing the pros and cons of its implementation.

Author: I see your point... My intention here is to give an idea about what is still being actively worked on / up for discussion. Of course, this shouldn't go in depth about the actual implementation, backward comp, etc. And if we eventually do make this change it should be part of a FLIP.

> The current Module abstraction is particularly restrictive when it comes to initializing fields after construction. In the current Module API, the setup method is the place to initialize the fields of  the Module instance. Because `setup` is only called on a bound Module, the full Module API is available inside setup, including variable declaration. However, oftentimes we don’t actually require any stateful API’s to initialize a field. In fact, most commonly we simply want to declare a submodule. More importantly, it’s often useful to inspect submodules for debugging or to partially run the model. Consider for example:

Reviewer: Nit: "inside `setup`" <- "inside setup"

```suggestion
The current Module abstraction is particularly restrictive when it comes to initializing fields after construction. In the current Module API, the setup method is the place to initialize the fields of  the Module instance. Because `setup` is only called on a bound Module, the full Module API is available inside `setup`, including variable declaration. However, oftentimes we don’t actually require any stateful API’s to initialize a field. In fact, most commonly we simply want to declare a submodule. More importantly, it’s often useful to inspect submodules for debugging or to partially run the model. Consider for example:
```
